An Introduction to CryptographyCryptography, the art or science of making and breaking ciphers has longbeen the purview of the government--no longer. With the onset of theinformation age, keeping secrets and discovering other people's secrets hasturned into an extremely important exercise. However, to the uninitiated,cryptography seems like magic. A strange combination of mathematics,computer science, and guesswork is used in what turns out to be a centuriesold art. Herein is a basic introduction to cryptography from a somewhatdifferent viewpoint.The purpose of a cryptographic scheme is to allow authorized people tocommunicate without permitting unauthorized people to understand what themessage; that is, to be able to transmit these messages in such a way thateven if the message falls into the hands of an adversary, it is useless tothem. By tradition, one of the earliest ciphers used is writing itself.Indeed writing has all the markings of a complex code, except that almosteveryone today knows this system and uses it so frequently that many don'teven realize that it is a code. When one talks of bokken, the reader mightor might not know what is being referred to. Le livre might make sense tosome other people, referring to the same thing, but to many, the book is theform they would be familiar with, again referring to the same object. Eachof those means the same thing, they are a representation of an object, butthey are not the object itself. A cipher is a way of representing a message,by changing the message according to some set pattern or method to preservemeaning, and make it possible to decrypt or change the message back into itsoriginal form. Many ciphers could be thought of as filters, and this senseis how ciphers mentioned here will be looked at.The basic idea behind cryptography is as follows. The message passes througha filter to encrypt the message into the ciphertext. The ciphertext goes tothe receiver who passes the ciphertext through a related filter to decryptthe message and obtain the plaintext.After a while, too many people learned the code called writing to allowmessages to be securely transmitted in that manner. A new method of keepingmessages secret had to be obtained. One of the first such methods is calledthe Caesar cipher. So called because it was used in the time of the Romans,this cipher would take each letter of the plaintext and replace it with aletter three letters later in the alphabet. In the case of letters near theend, the alphabet was looped around back on itself, so Z would be replacedby C. The Caesar cipher is sometimes referred to as a rot-3 cipher to usecomputer terms and a form of this scheme is still in limited use today. Onoccasion on the Internet, a message that could be considered offensive, orto avoid casual scrutiny would be sent in rot-13 format. In this case, thecharacters are shifted to a character 13 larger.This filtering method of rotation is a rather simple and easy to expressfilter. A character is put through the filter and a single character comesout according to a very simple preset rule. Unfortunately, this method isconsidered highly insecure today, and was quickly broken. The filter isflat, each letter gets the same change no matter what it may be.Another similar cipher which again sees limited use today, but not forsecurity, is a substitution cipher. Here, instead of a preset rule to alwayssubstitute each letter with another letter, each time a character is shown,a certain other character is written. This cipher could be described as 26separate band pass filters which each are highly specific, they only act onone letter in the alphabet. All 26 filters are combined to form a singlefilter that has no overlaps, as each letter in the alphabet has a uniquerepresentation in the ciphertext. Here again, the filter would be rathersimple, in that it is constant in how it changes each letter. So forexample, such a cipher may send A to T, B to K, C to Q, D to G, and so on.However, each letter in the ciphertext stands for one and only one letter inthe plaintext, and each letter in the plaintext has a unique mapping intothe ciphertext. Or, in mathematical terms, the filter is one to one andonto. While used commonly in newspaper puzzles, this method is only slightlymore secure than the rotation cipher. The primary attack is based on letterfrequency counts and other rules of formation for a word, like all wordshave a vowel--one of six letters. So if a one letter word is found for aciphertext of a formal English message, it is obvious that the letter iseither an I or an A. Here the problem of capitalizing versus noncapitalizing is ignored.Over time, the method of a cyclic cipher was developed. The problem with thestandard substitution cipher is that once a letter is broken, it is brokenfor the whole message, making guess attacks for each letter a feasiblemethod for cryptanalysis. In this new method, a filter is applied to thefilter, where the master filter is a time dependent filter with the lowerlevel filter being time independent. In other words, a regular rule is usedto transcribe one letter to another, perhaps a rotation. But instead of aconstant rotation, the cipher rule or lower level filter is then changedaccording to a regular pattern before encrypting the next character. Thelower level filter which actually encrypts the message is changed each timeby the higher level filter which controls the lower level one.A simple example would be two rotates combined. The lower level cipher wouldrotate the character by some number of letters. The number of letters wouldcycle on a 26 long cycle. So while the first occurrence of an A might go toB, in the word AARON, the second A would go to C.The obvious advantage is that this method makes the previous modes of attackmuch less feasible. To decrypt the message, it is necessary not only to knowwhat the two filters are, but also to know what the initial settings on thehigher level filter were. The code can be reused simply by changing thestarting point of the higher level filter. This introduces the concept ofthe key as commonly thought of today: a (usually) short set of informationthat is required in addition to knowledge of the method used to decrypt theciphertext (see glossary). This idea of a cylic cipher leads to one of themost famous examples of cryptography, Enigma.In the early part of the twentieth century, a machine was developed forcommercial use in Germany called Enigma. This machine was consideredextremely secure given that the number of possible keys was enormous. Therewere several different wheels with a slightly different filter on each, andthe combination of any three wheels, combined with what setting the wheelsbegan at made up the key. One of the flaws of Enigma is that a letter couldnot come up as itself in the encryption. This may not seem as a flaw untilyou realize that this means that the cryptanalyst can automatically rule outone letter of the alphabet for that character being examined--the letterthat appears.Enigma ended up being broken by a machine known as the bombe. One of thefirst computers, this machine broke the Enigma codes in under 24 hours onaverage by the end of the war, despite the German use of five wheels by then(instead of three earlier in the war), and regardless of which wheels wereused, which order, and what the initial settings were. To give an idea ofhow much more difficult a key search is with five wheels than three, eachwheel having 26 possible settings, and seven possible wheels means 26 * 7possible settings just for the first wheel in the machine. The second wheelwould have 26 * 6 possible settings. And so on down to 26 * 3 possiblesettings for the third wheel. Multiplying that all together yields 2.994 x10^10 possible settings for the machine. The early version had five possiblewheels so it had a "mere" 1054560 possible keys. The computer had enteredthe scene by breaking a system believed unbreakable by the Germans,pernamently securing the computer an important place in the list of tools ofa cryptanalyst.All was not lost for this relatively simple style of cipher however. Anothertype of code, called the one time pad, invented in the 1920's, ended upbeing proven the most secure code of all as long as it was properly used.Enigma relied on a cycle of known length and a system of known length tofilter each character into the ciphertext. The one time pad is based on theidea of not having a set cycle of finite length at all. Instead, a key aslong as the message is prepared and then used to filter the plaintext toproduce the ciphertext. The security comes when a truly random filter isused to filter the data. Since the filter used is random, the outputted datais random. This ciphertext is transmitted to the receiver, who then filtersthe ciphertext with the same random filter used to encrypt the message, andwhich causes the plaintext to reappear. Today, the bit representations ofthe characters is used to simplify the task. The filter is a random bitstream (sequence of ones and zeros), and the data is expressed as bits. Bythe extended ASCII code, every eight bits makes up one character so theresult is actually in the bits, though characters are frequently used as acompact way of expressing the data.Two major problems arise in the one time pad. The first major problem isthat the data must be truly random. This means that the receiver must meetbeforehand with the transmitter to exchange this random bit stream. Trulyrandom is defined as when any arbitrary bit is chosen, it has no impact onwhat any other bits in the bit stream are. One way to describe this is byrolling dice. Each die roll is independent of the other rolls, and each rollin itself is random. However, given the size that the filter must be, theperson might end up having to do over 8 million die rolls to get a suitablelarge bit stream to transmit even a fairly ordinary amount of informationsecurely.The second major problem is that the random data can only be used once. Ifthe key is reused, then new attacks appear that could be used to break thecryptoscheme, meaning that the system is no longer truly secure.Despite the problems with the one time pad, it is still considered to be thebest possible security. When used properly, it is completely unbreakable. Itis just as likely to translate a sequence of ciphertext into MacBeth as itwould be to translate the ciphertext into the lectures of a Botanyprofessor, meaning that unless the key is compromised in some manner, thecryptanalyist has no way of knowing when they have successfully guessed thekey.The problems of this method show up quite clearly however, and one time padsare not considered acceptable for common use. In an effort to furthercomplicate the job of the cryptanalyst and make codes more secure,cryptographic schemes began to work on blocks of some number of letters at atime, called block ciphers. These ciphers are in common private use today.Before private key schemes are discussed, the concept of the round must beintroduced. Sometimes in cryptography it is desirable to take a filter thatisn't too complex, but to make the method secure by applying the filterrepeatedly over the ciphertext. As all crypto schemes so far examined areletter ciphers (they work on one letter at a time), each letter would beencrypted, then that encrypted letter would be encrypted again, and so on.The number of times the filter is applied over the area is called the numberof rounds. Enigma for example used in its most famous form three wheels(later to be upgraded to five) and each wheel was a very closely relatedfilter, but could be set differently, so each wheel used was a round in theencryption.The private key ciphers have been advocated by the US government for privateuse for many years now. One of the most famous examples is DES or DataEncryption Standard. Another more recent example is called SKIPJACK. Bothhave been proposed by the government for private use. What the governmentuses for itself is a matter of speculation and inappropriate for a low levelintroduction like this paper.The basic idea behind the private key system is that a private key is usedto filter the message through some complex but reversible filter. Themessage is typically filtered through a number of rounds, 32 being the newstandard. 32 rounds means that each block of code is sent through the filter32 times before taking the output. The filter is created to be extremelycomplex to make reversing the filter a difficult job at best. The entirecode would become worthless if a filter were to be created that without thekey used could in "reasonable" time recreate the plaintext.DES derives much of its security from the use of multiple rounds likeEnigma. Unlike Enigma however, DES will take a block of plaintext andencrypt that entire block. It will then take the next block and encryptthat, and so on until it finishes the message. Commonly blocks are 64 bitsin length, or 8 characters. Full DES uses 16 different rounds. In order toprovide security for each individual message, a key is used. DES uses a keyof 56 bits in length. While this may seem short, being only a few charactersin length, this provides for more than 7.2 x 10^16 possible keys. It is onlytoday almost 20 years after DES was adopted as a national standard that DESis considered not secure enough for users who truly insist upon highsecurity. Interestingly, the flaw in DES is considered to be the limited keysize. For this reason, modern cryptosystems use keys of much greater length,SKIPJACK using a key of 80 bits in length.Public key systems on the other hand tend to be favored by academia. Themost famous example of a public key system is probably RSA. Instead of onefunction doing both the encryption and the decryption, a slightly differentfunction is used. The function to encrypt a message is published in anelectronic phone book, but the function to decrypt is kept secret. This way,anyone can send a person a secret message, but only the appropriate receivercan read it. Imagine if you will having two complementary filters. These twofilters are nearly identical for everyone, except for the key used toinitialize them. The filters are used to create the ciphertext which is sentto the receiver. The receiver uses the complimentary filter initialized bytheir private key to decrypt the message. This system makes it easy to add anew person to the list of people who can receive secure communication,without having to compromise another persons security. However, the securityof public key systems rests in unproven mathematical assumptions. Forexample, RSA relies on the difficulty of factoring the product of twoextremely large primes (order of magnitude 100 digits). If a method were tobe implemented to quickly factor the product of two primes of arbitrarylength, then RSA would be completely unsecure, despite being todayconsidered one of the more secure algorithms available for public use.A filter may not be quite the most accurate way to describe a cryptosystem,but it is hoped that the idea behind the cryptosystems described iscommunicated more effectively to the reader. Given that for the most part,cryptography is a specialized field for highly technical experts, theanalogy is useful in describing a subject that is rapidly coming into thepublic eye today.